The general can experience.
This is what I've always wanted to ask you about this.
Did you feel physically endanger when that was happening?
Because that was such a gigantic moment and so
terrifying for most Americans that we're now sure that the
government had access to our emails and our phone records and,
and it was all broken by by you and Snowden. And I wondered, like,
were you worried for your safety?
Yeah, for sure. I mean, for one thing, you know,
at the time we were living in a part of Rio that was very isolated.
We were living literally on a mountain in the middle of the woods.
And, you know, I had with me at all times, physically on my person,
14 or 15 thumb drives that contained hundreds of
thousands. If not more, I've never quantified it on purpose. You know,
of the most sensitive documents possessed by the most powerful
government on the planet, the most secretive agency within that government.
And I would carry them on my person at all times. You know,
I would go to the supermarket and just start laughing because on my back would
be a backpack filled with, you know, top secret CIA and NSA documents.
And obviously there were a lot of people who wanted to get their hands on those
documents, not just the U S government to take them back,
or they realized at some point that that would be impossible,
but other governments, um, non-government actors.
But then on top of that, you know,
every story that we were doing was affecting markets,
it was affecting diplomatic relations. So there was obviously a big,
big interest in a lot of intelligence agencies around the world and what I was
doing and, you know, felt monitored all the time.
Um, because I was, you know,
not like the kind of paranoid feeling of monitoring,
but the actual being monitored is, has been confirmed by, uh,
in a lot of different ways. Um, but you know,
the biggest concern at the time was that the U S government being the U S
government got very bullying and very threatening and was explicitly and
implicitly, both in public and private making clear that if I left Brazil,
there was a good chance that they were trying to arrest me. I mean,
remember how extreme they were with Snowden.
They brought down the plane of the president of Bolivia when he was
coming back from Moscow on the suspicion that he might've been taking Snowden
with them. And he course he wasn't, but that's how extreme they were.
So I had to, I stayed in Brazil for about 10 months and didn't feel safe.
Leaving the justice department was telling my lawyers if he leaves and shows up
at any airport, we're going to arrest him.
And the Brazilian government was super protective of,
of us because a lot of that Snowden reporting revealed how the NSA
and the UK and Canada were spying on Brazilian institutions,
Brazilian oil companies,
the president of Brazil Dumor Dilma Rousseff the population. So in Brazil,
this reporting was looked at very favorably. And so the government,
the Senate offered a lot of,
so I just felt very safe in Brazil and very unsafe elsewhere. Well.
It's very nice that you felt safe in Brazil. It's very nice that they were, uh,
were protecting you. Um,
do they have a history of monitoring their people the same way the United States
does?
Well? So, you know, as I referenced earlier, um, the history of Brazil,
the recent political history is a really dark one,
but relevant to the U S the 1940s and 1950s, early 1960s.
They were building the first, really vibrant democracy in Latin America.
And they were steadfastly attempting to remain neutral and the endless
Soviet union U S cold war. But in 19 63, 19 64,
they had this kind of center of that precedent that the U S thought was becoming
a little too close to Moscow, a little bit too social S he, you know,
nothing communists, but just very kind of mild reforms like rent control and,
uh, land reform,
and some nationalization of companies to try and assuage the really
brutal income inequality that has played the country forever.
And so the us government first under John Kennedy,
and then under Lyndon Johnson,
worked with right wing Brazilian generals to overthrow that democratically
elected government violently.
And they imposed a military dictatorship for the next 21 years of which the
current Prezilians president desirable scenario was apart as an army captain.
And those are really dark days. You know, dissidents were murder,
journalists were killed and exiled. Um,
everybody was spied upon with the help of the CIA and
[inaudible] in the UK.
And so a lot of that kind of indoors that relationship between the CIA and the
Brazilian government, but since 19 8500 democratized,
it's kind of re it's become once again a model of a liberal democracy. So, no,
I don't, no government in the world is obsessed with spying on the world.
Like the U S is. Um, but yeah, there's a pretty dark underbelly.
Like there isn't any major country in Brazil of kind of like a deep state or an
intelligence community, whatever you want to call it that definitely, you know,
uses the dark arts to maintain control over the population.
When you hit send, when you finally released, when you,
when you put that story out, what was the feeling like? Was there ever a, oh,
what have I done moment?
No, there's probably should have been.
And if I were like healthier from a mental health perspective,
there would have been a bigger one of those, but, you know, it was,
we were, I was in Hong Kong, first of all, you know, we had flown there to meet,
to meet Snowden. Um, and I wasn't sleeping at all.
I mean, obviously I knew it was, you know,
going to be one of the biggest stories of, of that generation,
if not the biggest. Um, and I had spent years, Joe, you know,
like writing about the NSA and, you know,
kind of trying to warn people that it seemed like it was being a lot
more invasive and a lot more aggressive about
monitoring our private communications and our private activities domestically
than either the law permitted or anyone knew.
But it was very difficult to sound that alarm,
because everything was done behind a wall of secrecy.
And so when I finally got these documents in my hand, you know,
it was like the dream, right? It's why you go into journalism.
But especially for me to be able to show the world that everything was so much
more extreme than even I thought that I just wanted to get them out in the world
as soon as possible, like any delay at all on the part of the guardian,
which was the newspaper with which I was working at the time and reporting,
you know, drove me into a rage. Um,
I just felt like the world deserved to see these documents. And also, you know,
I was so inspired by, by, by Snowden. I mean,
you've talked to him, I think twice now. So, you know, like, you know,
he's this 29 year old kid at the time who pretty much gambled,
we thought 95% likelihood, he was going to end up in prison,
not for a few years, but for the rest of his life.
And like not in a nice prison,
but in the kind of person that you go and when they accuse you of jeopardizing
American national security,
but he did it because he believed in the cause like that was not the reason.
Like not the movie script. He like, that was his genuine, which shocked me,
right. It was this jaded reporter who kept looking for the real motive,
but that was it. There was no other motive.
And so I just felt like I owed him such a duty and kind of inspired by his
example. I thought, you know,
if he's willing to go to prison for the rest of his life, um,
and he chose me to work with him, you know,
I kinda courage kind of became infectious. Um,
and we kind of adopted this trench bunker mentality.
Like we were in this together and we were going to fight everybody. Um,
and that became the energy much more.
And it kind of drowned out the fears that probably were rational for us to have.
I felt very honored and very,
very fortunate to be able to talk to him.
And I think he's a very noble person,
unusually noble and you in long form conversations, if,
if there was any hint of something different,
I really believe it would have leaked out. He really is that guy.
And I think history when we look upon this case, I mean,
the documentary was pretty excellent. Um,
that showed all the moments leading up to you releasing the story.
But I think these conversations with him,
I just feel very fortunate to have that platform where he's willing to come on
and talk for hours at a time and express his thoughts on just on
spying in general national security issues and all of these situations that
he faced, uh, up to. And now, currently, because of that, and he's,
it's, it's a, it's a very,
it's embarrassing that this is the world that we live in.
This is the country that we live in, that,
that man who I really genuinely believe is a hero is
now a Russian citizen forever.
Yeah. Hopefully there's an opportunity. Um,
just because of all the bizarre vindictive
impulses that Trump has, and the fact that by complete coincidence,
the people who want snowed in to be in Russia forever or to
rot in prison happened to be Trump's enemies as well.
That I'm hoping there's an opportunity to persuade Trump after the
election, particularly if he loses,
but even if he doesn't that he should follow through on what he's now twice
bizarrely raised on his own, which was the prospect of pardoning Snowden.
It's something probably my top priority in the world at the moment.
And the reason is, is what you just said, which is, is, you know,
w we, we we're, we're,
we're so accustomed to people doing things for are, uh,
just missing sky. Did reasons, corrupted reasons, um,
people lying and deceiving about why they're doing things about presenting a
false version of who they are. And that's the thing is, you know,
you talk to them for those hours. When I got to Hong Kong, you know,
before becoming a journalist, I was a litigator in Manhattan,
and I used those skills. You know, I CA I mean,
I kind of created a little mini Guantanamo where I just like put them in front
of me and just question them for eight hours, straight, three different,
you know,
three straight days without letting you even have a glass of water or go to the
bathroom, because I really wanted to know what was actually motivating him,
who was this person to whom I was about to tie myself and my reputation and
credibility eternally. And he really is somebody who,
you know, and like the thing about it too, it's like,
that's so amazing about it is that oftentimes people who leak secrets or who
become a source that, you know,
wants to expose secrets and are willing to go to prison are often kind of
up people, right? They're like alienated from society. Um,
they feel persecuted and mistreated.
They don't have much going on in their lives and therefore don't feel like they
have a lot to risk. Noting was exactly the opposite. You know,
he had at the time, this incredibly beautiful and brilliant girlfriend,
who today is his wife. They had been together for years.
And in order to do what he did, he had to deceive her.
He had to leave the country and not tell her what he was doing,
because he wanted to make certain that when the government knocked on her door,
she could truthfully say she knew nothing about it because he knew they would go
after her. If, if, if they could hire to it. Um, he had a great job.
He was making a lot of money. You know, he was a high school dropout,
but had taught himself these really coveted skills.
Um, so we had a great career ahead of him,
a mother and a father who both love him, very stable home life.
He had none of those traits, you know,
that typically are used to demonize people who do this,
which is why I knew he was going to be gold from a media perspective.
And to be able to prevent the government from that demonizing him in the way
they like to do. But more importantly than that, like leaving aside,
all the perception stuff and all the PR and media stuff, you know,
he's probably the person or one of the people,
certainly I admire most in this world in all the time I've lived.
And what's so unbelievable. You know, people always say to me, oh, poor Snowden.
You know, he's trapped in Russia. He can't come home.
He's facing multiple felony charges. He's been separated from his,
all of which is true. But like,
I also always say that he's the person who I know in this world who,
when he puts his head down on his pillow at night, he falls asleep most easily.
Um, because there's something about knowing that you,
you face this dangerous choice and you chose the right thing. I mean,
in Hong Kong, as I said, we were never, I was never sleeping.
My colleague or Poydras was never sleeping.
We were sleeping like an hour or two with the aid of very strong sleep
narcotics. And, you know, he would say like at nine 30, he would yawn.
He would say, okay, guys, I think I'm going to hit the hay.
Like he had no care in the world. Um, and that was, I was like, what the?
And he would like to see for eight hours, you know, and he would wake up,
have a little coffee. Um, but that's what that, you know,
clean conscience does to a person, even.
With a clean conscious,
I just don't understand the weight of the stress that he was under,
how I don't understand how he could be so calm.
He, I mean, he, he didn't have stress. That's, what's so bizarre. I mean,
you saw on the film right in the documentary citizen four where like, you know,
if we wait, cause we were, we had no idea what the CIA knew.
We had no idea what the Chinese government, we knew.
We had no idea what Hong Kong authorities knew. We were waiting.
I was always waiting for the door to be kicked in at any moment, you know, and,
and for him, at least if not the rest of us, you know,
me and Laura to be taken away. Um,
and like I said, I mean,
our working assumption the whole time was that there was, you know,
as excited as I was the one thing that was kind of a dark cloud that hovered
over it all the time was that this person who I had now become connected with
and developed an admiration for, I was certain at any moment,
he was going to be in the hands of the us government.
And the next time I would see him would be on television in an orange jumpsuit
and shackles and a courtroom,
getting ready to be sentenced to like 50 years in prison.
And one of those hellholes,
you have the U S specializes in where you spend 23 and a half hours a day alone
in your cell. Um, and you have 30 days,
30 minutes a day where you get to walk in a little room in the sun to satisfy
legal requirements. And that was going to be him for the rest of his life.
He got very lucky. I mean, he almost did end up that way. So for me,
I was concerned for him stress for him,
but he was at peace with the fact that that was the path he
chose. I mean, it wasn't like, you know,
and that was really important for me to know that he had thought through all the
likely consequences.
I didn't want to feel like I was using somebodies work
product,
who hadn't given full thought to what it is that they had gotten themselves
into. And it was only once I became very, you know, he,
he could fight the statutes with which they were going to charge him and what
the legal defenses that were available were.
So he had given extreme thought to this,
he's an adult and he made that choice and it was amazing to this very day.
He's completely at peace with it.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st to December 1st,
they're going to be available everywhere, but after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.